---
title: 1. NFT
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Non-Fungible Token - Liquid NFT (TIP-4.1)

## Abstract

The following standard allows for the implementation of a standard API for non-fungible tokens within smart contracts.
This standard provides basic functionality to transfer and manage tokens.

## Motivation

A standard interface allows any tokens on Everscale blockchain to be re-used by other applications: from wallets to decentralized exchanges.
This standard:
 * Respects asynchronous nature of Everscale blockchain (includes callbacks and callback getters);
 * Covers only the `Token` without auction or complex logic built in (UNIX way);
 * Follows `one Token = one Contract` paradigm;
 * Follows KISS paradigm;
 * Can have only internal owners (addresses);
 * Doesn't require the owner to worry about `Token` balances (gas management);
 * Keeps all the structure in JSON format, this allows to have different data standards without the need to change token code;

## Entities

### LiquidNFT

`LiquidNFT` - Contract that represents a single non-fungible `Token`. Following distributed programming paradigm, one `Token` is one contract. `Token` stores general information and metadata in JSON format. Metadata is always stored on-chain.

`Token` can be of two different types: `Master Edition + Print` and `Normal NFT`.

#### Master Edition

A `Master Edition` token, when minted, represents both a non-fungible token on Everscale and metadata that allows creators to control the provenance of prints created from the `Master Edition`.

Rights to create prints are tokenized itself, and the owner of the `Collection` can distribute tokens that allow users to create prints from `Master Editions`. Additionally, the creator can set the max supply of the `Master Edition` just like a regular mint on Everscale, with the main difference being that each print is a numbered edition created from it.

A notable and desirable effect of `Master Editions` is that as prints are sold, the artwork will still remain visible in the artist's wallet as a `Master Edition`, while the prints appear in the purchaser's wallets.

#### Print

A `Print` represents a copy of an NFT, and is created from a `Master Edition`. Each `Print` has an edition number associated with it (`Token ID` stays the same within all `Prints` of one `Master Edition`).

#### Normal NFT

A `Normal NFT` when minted represents a non-fungible token on Everscale and metadata, but lacks rights to print. An example of a `Normal NFT` would be an artwork that is a one-of-a-kind that, once sold, is no longer within the artist's own wallet, but is in the purchaser's wallet.

### LiquidNFTSingle

`LiquidNFTSingle` represents a single standalone NFT without the need to create a `Collection`.

### LiquidNFTCollection

`LiquidNFTCollection` - Contract that represents `Collection` that can mint `Tokens`. 

## Links

`GitHub:` https://github.com/SolderingArmor/liquid-nft
`Standard:` https://github.com/SolderingArmor/liquid-nft/blob/master/STANDARD.md
`Description:` https://github.com/SolderingArmor/liquid-nft/blob/master/README.md